In this class, I will explain
the differences in the business
model of a platform compared to
a linear business and I will
do so using three criteria.
I have identified three criteria that
define a platform.
We start.
Well, the first thing I want you
to know is when we talk about
a linear business, what
is the main feature?
Well, as its name implies linear,
the main feature
is that linear create linear
value from the company
to its customers.
They sell products, provide
services, whatever it is, but in
a linear way and any example is worth
us.
Mercedes creates value to its customers
by selling cars, Ikea by selling
furniture, H&M by selling clothes,
a hotel by providing accommodation
services.
It delivers value in a linear way,
but on the platform things change.
In the platform, first criterion, there
are two sides.
There are two customer segments
or there are two sides that connect
within the platform and the
delivery of value is created within
the platform between the two sides,
between supply and demand,
between users of a social
network, etc.
Is it worth?
Unlike the linear business where the
company creates value for its customers,
the platform does what it does
is create an infrastructure within
which the users of the platform,
both sides, interact with
each other and create value.
Let us see it with an example.
Marriott is a hotel chain.
Marriott provides value, creates value,
forgives, by providing accommodation
services to its guests, to customers.
The linear model.
Go to Airbnb.
What does Airbnb do?
Does Airbnb provide accommodation
services to its customers, guests?
No, what it does is create
a platform within which there
are homeowners and guests.
This is the first of the
criteria of a platform with
respect to a linear business.
We have two sides.
Let us go to the second criterion.
The platforms are based on the network
effect, network effect, or network
economy.
You will hear it in different ways.
I will explain it again in comparison
with a linear model.
Let us return to the case of Marriott.
Marriott creates value from the
first customer to the last.
That is, if Marriott had only one
customer or any linear model had
only one customer, it creates value
to the first customer.
On the platforms, this is not the case.
On platforms, value grows as
the number of users on both
sides of the platform increases.
This is the network effect.
That is, Airbnb provides value
in the way it can add a huge
critical mass of users,
both on the side of the owners
and on the side of the
guests.
If it had no critical mass, if it had
not enough users, it would not
create value.
You think that on Airbnb, if you
want to rent a house in Madrid and
there are only two houses in offer,
it does not bring you any value.
Or if you are a owner in a house and
it turns out there are very
few guests, because it also does
not bring you value as a owner
of the platform.
The network effect is available
on all platforms.
We can give examples of a dating
network, for example, Tinder.
Tinder brings more value as
more users are involved.
Thus, the network effect is the
effect that is given on a platform
because the value it provides,
which creates the platform for
all its users, increases as the
number of users increases,
right?
This is a consequence without critical mass,
without many users, without millions
of users, in a thing that has its
advantages and its disadvantages.
We will discuss it later, but
I want you to be clear.
And this is very different from
a linear business, because
linear business creates value
from the first customer to the last.
Now, we go to the third criteria.
The resources a platform needs
are very different from the
resources a linear model needs.
Let us return to the case.
What are the resources a
business model like that of a
hotel chain like Marriott needs?
You probably already know.
The hotels.
It needs assets, real estate assets.
Mostly, there are more key features
we could add, but mostly
they are hotels.
What is the key resource you
need Airbnb or any other platform?
The platform.
You don't need to own the productive
media, you need the platform,
which is where supply
and demand or users
connect.
But let's see with more examples.
What are the resources
a taxi company needs?
Cars and licenses.
What resources does Uber
need?
You can definitely go ahead.
The platform.
As you can see, if we analyze the business
model and see it very clearly in
the canvas, the key resources a
linear business needs with respect
to a platform are completely
different, basically because
on the platform only the platform
is needed.
In linear models, the key
resources are the assets associated
with the provision of
that service or the
sale of that product.
Consequences of this?
Well, there have been many tweets that
have been very viral looking at a
bit this fact that is getting so
curious, that a company like Uber,
which is the world's leader in people
transportation, urban transportation,
doesn't have any car.
Airbnb has no home.
YouTube, which is one of
the world's leading content
platforms, but the first,
has no autovisual content,
is not the owner of any
of the videos.
As you can see, a huge revolution
has occurred in the business
world thanks to the disruption
of the platforms.
Well, let's look at it, because it's
important that you understand the differences
between a platform and a linear
model very well.
The platform, to begin with, has two
sides.
There are two segments within
the platform that create value
for each other, unlike a linear
model in which the company
delivers linear value to
the single customer segment.
In addition, a network effect is
generated on the platform, the
network effects are generated
because as the number of users on
the platform increases,
the value generated by the platform
for all users increases.
And this has a pernicious
effect on the fact that without critical
mass, without a sufficient critical
mass of users on both sides, the
platform is unusable,
it is worthless for nothing.
And finally, the key resources
a platform needs, the business
model on the platform,
are very different
from linear.
Why is it?
Because the only thing that is needed,
the main resource is the
platform, within which the
two sides are connected,
unlike a linear model in which
you have to be the owner of
the productive media.
And we talked, for example,
about Marriott, who has
to be the owner of hotels,
or we talked about a taxi
company that has to
be the owner of taxis, vehicles
or licenses.
In the next class, what we're
going to do is we'll analyze
the consequences, benefits
and challenges of platform
business models over linear
ones.